          .........................WHAT ARE SMART CONTRACTS?................
          
          In practice, participants don't write new code every time they want to request a computation on the EVM. Rather, application developers upload programs (reusable snippets of code) into EVM state, and users make requests to execute these code snippets with varying parameters. We call the programs uploaded to and executed by the network smart contracts.

At a very basic level, you can think of a smart contract like a sort of vending machine: a script that, when called with certain parameters, performs some actions or computation if certain conditions are satisfied. For example, a simple vendor smart contract could create and assign ownership of a digital asset if the caller sends ETH to a specific recipient.

Any developer can create a smart contract and make it public to the network, using the blockchain as its data layer, for a fee paid to the network. Any user can then call the smart contract to execute its code, again for a fee paid to the network.

Thus, with smart contracts, developers can build and deploy arbitrarily complex user-facing apps and services such as: marketplaces, financial instruments, games, etc.



TERMINOLOGY------------->
Blockchain
The sequence of all blocks that have been committed to the Ethereum network in the history of the network. So named because each block contains a reference to the previous block, which helps us maintain an ordering over all blocks (and thus over the precise history).

ETH
Ether (ETH) is the native cryptocurrency of Ethereum. Users pay ETH to other users to have their code execution requests fulfilled.

More on ETH

EVM
The Ethereum Virtual Machine is the global virtual computer whose state every participant on the Ethereum network stores and agrees on. Any participant can request the execution of arbitrary code on the EVM; code execution changes the state of the EVM.

More on the EVM

Nodes
The real-life machines which are storing the EVM state. Nodes communicate with each other to propagate information about the EVM state and new state changes. Any user can also request the execution of code by broadcasting a code execution request from a node. The Ethereum network itself is the aggregate of all Ethereum nodes and their communications.

More on nodes

Accounts
Where ETH is stored. Users can initialize accounts, deposit ETH into the accounts, and transfer ETH from their accounts to other users. Accounts and account balances are stored in a big table in the EVM; they are a part of the overall EVM state.


A DIGITAL VENDING MACHINE
Perhaps the best metaphor for a smart contract is a vending machine, as described by Nick Szabo. With the right inputs, a certain output is guaranteed.

To get a snack from a vending machine:

money + snack selection = snack dispensed

This logic is programmed into the vending machine.

A smart contract, like a vending machine, has logic programmed into it. Here's a simple example of how this vending machine would look if it were a smart contract written in Solidity:

pragma solidity 0.8.7;

contract VendingMachine {

    // Declare state variables of the contract
    address public owner;
    mapping (address => uint) public cupcakeBalances;

    // When 'VendingMachine' contract is deployed:
    // 1. set the deploying address as the owner of the contract
    // 2. set the deployed smart contract's cupcake balance to 100
    constructor() {
        owner = msg.sender;
        cupcakeBalances[address(this)] = 100;
    }

    // Allow the owner to increase the smart contract's cupcake balance
    function refill(uint amount) public {
        require(msg.sender == owner, "Only the owner can refill.");
        cupcakeBalances[address(this)] += amount;
    }

    // Allow anyone to purchase cupcakes
    function purchase(uint amount) public payable {
        require(msg.value >= amount * 1 ether, "You must pay at least 1 ETH per cupcake");
        require(cupcakeBalances[address(this)] >= amount, "Not enough cupcakes in stock to complete this purchase");
        cupcakeBalances[address(this)] -= amount;
        cupcakeBalances[msg.sender] += amount;
    }
}

Show all
📋 Copy
Like how a vending machine removes the need for a vendor employee, smart contracts can replace intermediaries in many industries.

PERMISSIONLESS
Anyone can write a smart contract and deploy it to the network. You just need to learn how to code in a smart contract language, and have enough ETH to deploy your contract. Deploying a smart contract is technically a transaction, so you need to pay Gas in the same way you need to pay gas for a simple ETH transfer. However, gas costs for contract deployment are far higher.

Ethereum has developer-friendly languages for writing smart contracts:

Solidity
Vyper
More on languages

However, they must be compiled before they can be deployed so that Ethereum's virtual machine can interpret and store the contract. More on compilation

COMPOSABILITY
Smart contracts are public on Ethereum and can be thought of as open APIs. This means you can call other smart contracts in your own smart contract to greatly extend what's possible. Contracts can even deploy other contracts.

Learn more about smart contract composability.

LIMITATIONS
Smart contracts alone cannot get information about "real-world" events because they can't send HTTP requests. This is by design. Relying on external information could jeopardise consensus, which is important for security and decentralization.

There are ways to get around this using oracles.

Another limitation of smart contracts is the maximum contract size. A smart contract can be a maximum of 24KB or it will run out of gas. This can be circumnavigated by using The Diamond Pattern.

MULTISIG CONTRACTS
Multisig (multiple-signature) contracts are smart contract accounts that require multiple valid signatures to execute a transaction. This is very useful for avoiding single points of failure for contracts holding substantial amounts of ether or other tokens. Multisigs also divide responsibility for contract execution and key management between multiple parties and prevent the loss of a single private key leading to irreversible loss of funds. For these reasons, multisig contracts can be used for simple DAO governance. Multisigs require N signatures out of M possible acceptable signatures (where N ≤ M, and M > 1) in order to execute. N = 3, M = 5 and N = 4, M = 7 are commonly used. A 4/7 multisig requires four out of seven possible valid signatures. This means the funds are still retrievable even if three signatures are lost. In this case, it also means that the majority of key-holders must agree and sign in order for the contract to execute
More on accounts

Transactions
A "transaction request" is the formal term for a request for code execution on the EVM, and a "transaction" is a fulfilled transaction request and the associated change in the EVM state. Any user can broadcast a transaction request to the network from a node. For the transaction request to affect the agreed-upon EVM state, it must be validated, executed, and "committed to the network" by another node. Execution of any code causes a state change in the EVM; upon commitment, this state change is broadcast to all nodes in the network. Some examples of transactions:

Send X ETH from my account to Alice's account.
Publish some smart contract code into EVM state.
Execute the code of the smart contract at address X in the EVM, with arguments Y.
More on transactions

Blocks
The volume of transactions is very high, so transactions are "committed" in batches, or blocks. Blocks generally contain dozens to hundreds of transactions.

More on blocks

Smart contracts
A reusable snippet of code (a program) which a developer publishes into EVM state. Anyone can request that the smart contract code be executed by making a transaction request. Because developers can write arbitrary executable applications into the EVM (games, marketplaces, financial instruments, etc.) by publishing smart contracts, these are often also called dapps, or Decentralized Apps.
